E-cycle
Presentation script


OPENING
-------
E-cycle is a live webcam sorter for two kinds of electronic waste: batteries
and wires. Hold one item in front of the camera. The page draws a box on it,
names it, and saves one photo when a new battery or wire stays in view.

The name on the page is E-cycle. Under that title the screen shows three
symbols: Battery, Wire, and Invalid. The live camera sits in the middle.
Saved photos appear below, split into a battery list and a wire list.

There is no custom dataset and no training step on this computer. A pretrained
CLIP model, ViT-B/32, does the naming. OpenCV finds where to look. An optional
YOLO-World model can add extra boxes. The web page is a local FastAPI server.


THE PROBLEM
-----------
Batteries and loose wires should stay out of ordinary trash. They are small,
they look different from each other, and a person sorting by hand has to look
at each piece. E-cycle is a close-range station for that look: one object,
near the camera, against a plain background.


WHAT RUNS
---------
Five pieces do the work.

1. The webcam. OpenCV opens it with the Windows DirectShow backend, then falls
   back to the default backend if that fails. The device index is 0 unless
   the environment variable CAMERA is set.

2. The detector in detector.py. Every half second it proposes boxes and asks
   the classifier to score each crop. Classification runs at 2 frames per
   second so the page stays responsive on a normal PC.

3. The classifier in classifier.py. This is OpenAI CLIP, loaded through the
   open_clip library as ViT-B-32-quickgelu with the openai weights. Those
   weights were trained with QuickGELU, so the matching architecture is
   required. The first run downloads about 350 MB. Later runs use the local
   copy and work offline. If a CUDA GPU is present the model runs on it.
   Otherwise it runs on the CPU. The model is put in eval mode, so dropout
   stays off and no weights are updated.

4. The web app in webapp.py. FastAPI serves the page, a multipart JPEG stream
   at /video, and a JSON status poll at /status every 500 milliseconds.
   Stream frames are JPEG at quality 80.

5. Optional YOLO-World. If ultralytics can load yolov8s-worldv2.pt, it is
   given the text classes "battery", "AA battery", "electrical wire", and
   "cable". Its boxes are extra proposals. E-cycle still runs when that file
   is missing.


HOW DETECTION WORKS
-------------------
Detection answers "where is the object?" before CLIP answers "what is it?"
A webcam frame is a full desk or wall. Scoring that whole picture would mix
the object with the room. So OpenCV first cuts out a few candidate rectangles.
CLIP only sees those crops.

Step 1. Measure the foreground, and reject objects that look too far.

A webcam has no depth sensor, so apparent size stands in for distance. Two
boxes are built before any label is chosen:

- A contour box. The frame is turned to gray, blurred with a 7 by 7 Gaussian,
  and passed through a Canny edge detector with thresholds 40 and 140. The
  edges are dilated twice with a 5 by 5 rectangle so broken outlines join up.
  External contours are found. Any contour whose box is under 1 percent of the
  frame, or over 95 percent, is dropped. The largest remaining box is kept.
- A line box, aimed at wires. A second Canny pass uses thresholds 50 and 150.
  Probabilistic Hough transform (HoughLinesP) looks for straight segments at
  least 25 percent of the shorter frame side, with a vote threshold of 60 and
  a gap of up to 20 pixels. The long segments are wrapped in one rectangle
  with 12 pixels of padding.

The distance gate then looks at those two boxes. The default minimum size is
0.10, meaning 10 percent of the frame. The object counts as near enough when
either box is at least that wide or that tall. Width and height are checked
separately because a wire is long and thin: a cable across the frame can be
only a few pixels thick and still be close. With a typical 60 degree webcam,
a 10 cm object about one metre away covers roughly 12 percent of the frame,
and a 5 cm battery about 6 percent, so 0.10 sits near a one metre cutoff.

If neither box is large enough, detection stops. The reason string is
"too far". CLIP is not called. The page says "Bring it closer" and draws a
faint center rectangle so you can see where it is looking.

Step 2. Propose regions.

When the object is near enough, the proposal list is:

- A fixed center window covering 45 percent of the width and 45 percent of
  the height. The person is asked to hold the item there. A smaller window
  keeps a distant room from being judged together with the object.
- The contour box from step 1, when one exists.
- The line box from step 1, when one exists.
- Any boxes from YOLO-World, when that model loaded. Its confidence floor
  for a proposal is 0.05. These boxes are candidates only. CLIP still decides
  the label.

Duplicate boxes are removed when their intersection-over-union is 0.80 or
higher. Each surviving box is expanded by 6 percent on every side, clipped
to the frame, and that padded crop is what CLIP sees. A box smaller than
16 pixels on either side is discarded.

Step 3. Score every crop, then keep one box per object.

Each crop comes back as battery, wire, invalid, or background. Background
crops are dropped. If any crop is a battery or a wire, those win and the
invalid crops are set aside. Invalid is shown only when no battery or wire
survived.

Overlapping winners are merged. Boxes are sorted by confidence. A later box
is treated as the same object when intersection-over-union is at least 0.50,
or when at least 70 percent of the smaller box sits inside the other. If both
boxes have the same label and the smaller one is still at least 4 percent of
the larger one's area, the tighter box is kept. That is why a tight contour
around a battery replaces the big center window instead of drawing two boxes
on the same object.

Step 4. Draw.

Battery is drawn in orange, wire in green, invalid in red. The caption is the
label plus the confidence to two decimals, for example "battery 0.84". When
nothing survived, the center window is drawn in gray and the overlay text is
"none" or "too far".


HOW THE CLIP MODEL WORKS
------------------------
CLIP is a two-tower network. One tower reads an image. The other reads text.
Both towers output a vector of the same length. Training, done by OpenAI on a
very large set of internet photos and their captions, pulls the image vector
and the matching caption vector toward each other and pushes unrelated pairs
apart. After training, a new label is just a new sentence. That is zero-shot
classification: E-cycle never shows CLIP a labeled battery dataset of its own.

The image tower here is a Vision Transformer, ViT-B/32. "B" is the base size.
"32" means the picture is cut into patches of 32 by 32 pixels. The tower used
by these weights applies QuickGELU in its feed-forward layers. The image is
converted from OpenCV's BGR order to RGB, wrapped as a PIL image, and passed
through CLIP's own preprocess: resize, center crop, and the normalization
CLIP was trained with. A crop smaller than 8 pixels on a side is rejected
before the model runs.

The text tower is a transformer tokenizer plus a text encoder. E-cycle does
not ask one sentence. It asks four groups, and each group is three sentences
so the class covers more than one wording.

Battery:
    "a close-up photo of a battery"
    "a photo of an AA battery or lithium battery"
    "a photo of a 9V battery or button cell"

Wire:
    "a close-up photo of an electrical wire"
    "a photo of a cable or copper wire"
    "a photo of a power cord or USB cable"

Other object:
    "a close-up photo of some other object"
    "a photo of a cup, bottle, phone, book, box, or pen"
    "a photo of a hand, tool, or household item that is not a battery or a wire"

Empty scene:
    "a photo of an empty table or desk with nothing on it"
    "a photo of a blank wall, floor, or plain empty surface"
    "a blurry photo of an empty room"

At startup, and only at startup, each sentence is tokenized and encoded.
Each vector is L2-normalized, so its length is 1 and the later dot product
is cosine similarity. The three vectors in a group are averaged, and that
average is normalized again. The result is four text vectors that stay in
memory: battery, wire, other, empty. They are not recomputed per frame.

For each crop, the image tower produces one vector, also L2-normalized.
Similarity to the four text vectors is the dot product. CLIP's temperature
scaling multiplies those similarities by 100, then softmax turns the four
numbers into probabilities that add up to 1. Softmax means a strong match
to one class suppresses the others.

The decision rule in interpret_scores is stricter than "pick the biggest
probability":

1. Split the four probabilities into the three object bins (battery, wire,
   other) and the empty bin.
2. If the empty probability is higher than every object probability, the crop
   is background. On the page that becomes "none" when no other crop wins.
   An empty desk can therefore stay unlabeled.
3. Otherwise the winning object is the largest of battery, wire, and other.
   Its confidence is that probability divided by the sum of the three object
   probabilities, so the reported percentage is the share inside the object
   group, after empty has already lost.
4. If "other" wins, the label is invalid. A cup, phone, pen, or similar
   household item is supposed to land here. It is drawn and it is not saved.
   This third class exists so those objects are not forced into battery or wire.
5. If battery or wire wins but its share of the three object scores is below
   0.60, the crop is background. The default threshold refuses a weak guess.
   The desktop window can change it with --threshold.
6. Otherwise the label is battery or wire, with that confidence.

A hand in the frame is handled on purpose. The empty prompts describe a desk,
a wall, or an empty room. A hand is closer to the "other object" prompts, or
it is simply part of the crop around the battery or wire. Empty wins only when
it beats every object bin, so a hand holding an item does not wipe the label
out by itself.


HOW A PHOTO IS SAVED
--------------------
The camera thread keeps the latest boxes and asks a small state machine,
SaveGate, whether this frame is a new item.

The label must stay the same for 0.5 seconds. A one-frame flicker does not
save. When the stable label changes to battery or wire, that item is pending.
A save also waits until 2 seconds have passed since the previous save. The
pending flag is then cleared, so holding the same object does not write a
second file. Take the object away until the page says "none" or "too far",
then show the next one.

The file is the drawn frame, not the raw camera image. The name is
YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_label_confidence.jpg, for example
20261005_121430_battery_0.84.jpg. Battery files go to captures\battery\.
Wire files go to captures\wire\. The folder is next to the program, created
on startup. "none", "too far", and "invalid" are not written. The page shows
the eight newest photos in each list and the total count on the Battery and
Wire symbols.


THE LABELS
----------
    battery     CLIP's battery vector won with confidence at least 0.60.
                The Battery symbol lights. A photo can be saved.
    wire        CLIP's wire vector won with confidence at least 0.60.
                The Wire symbol lights. A photo can be saved.
    invalid     The "other object" vector beat battery and wire.
                The Invalid symbol lights. Nothing is saved.
    none        No crop cleared the rules. The scene looked empty, or the
                best battery or wire score was under 0.60.
    too far     The contour and the line box were both under 10 percent of
                the frame in width and in height. CLIP did not run.


A LIVE DEMO
-----------
Start the server from the project folder and wait until the terminal says
the model is ready.

    .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m uvicorn webapp:app --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000

Open http://127.0.0.1:8000 on that same computer. The tab title and the
heading both say E-cycle.

1. Hold a battery in the center, close to the camera, on a plain desk.
   The Battery ring fills with the confidence, and an orange box appears.
2. Keep it still for about half a second. One photo appears under
   Battery photos.
3. Move it away until the status says "Watching the frame" or
   "Bring it closer".
4. Show a wire. The Wire symbol lights and one photo is saved.
5. Show a cup, a phone, or a pen. Invalid lights. The folders stay as they are.

The desktop window is the same detector without saving:

    .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe classify.py

Press q or Esc in that window to quit. Useful flags:

    --camera 1         another webcam index
    --threshold 0.70   demand a larger share of the object scores
    --threshold 0.50   accept a weaker battery or wire match
    --min-size 0.15    require the object to look closer
    --min-size 0.06    allow a slightly smaller foreground
    --min-size 0       turn the distance gate off
    --det-conf 0.05    YOLO-World proposal threshold
    --no-preview       print labels in the terminal only

Closing the browser tab does not release the camera. Stop the server with
Ctrl+C.


WHAT TO SAY IF ASKED
--------------------
Did you train this model?
    The weights are OpenAI's public CLIP checkpoint. E-cycle only supplies
    the twelve prompt sentences and the decision rule. No battery or wire
    photos were used to update the network.

Why text prompts instead of class IDs?
    CLIP's text tower is the classifier head. Changing a sentence changes
    the class, which is why "9V battery" and "USB cable" can be added
    without a new training run.

What is the 0.84 on the box?
    It is the winning object's share of the battery + wire + other softmax
    mass, after the empty bin has lost. It is not a calibrated probability
    from a dataset of this project.

Where do the photos go?
    captures\battery\ and captures\wire\ beside the code, on whatever
    computer is running the server. The path follows the program folder.
    The page lists the eight most recent files in each folder.

Why "none"?
    The crop lost to the empty prompts, or battery and wire were both under
    the 0.60 share. Move the object into the center and fill more of the
    gray rectangle. The desktop window can lower the cutoff with
    --threshold 0.50.

Why "too far"?
    Both the contour box and the line box were smaller than 10 percent of
    the frame. Hold it closer, or run the desktop window with --min-size 0.06.

Why did a random object become a battery?
    Its crop was closer to the battery sentences than to the other-object
    sentences, and the share was at least 0.60. Raise the cutoff with
    --threshold 0.70 and use a plain background.

Why is classification only twice a second?
    ViT-B/32 on a CPU is the slow part. The video stream still updates every
    frame, and the last boxes stay drawn until the next score arrives.

The wrong camera opened.
    Stop the server, then:

        $env:CAMERA = "1"
        .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m uvicorn webapp:app --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000

    Close Zoom, Teams, or any other app using the webcam.

The address does not open from a phone.
    127.0.0.1 is the computer running the server. Open the page on that PC.


LIMITS
------
E-cycle is built for one object held near the lens. The center window is 45
percent of the frame, and the size gate is about a metre for a small battery.
It does not watch a whole bin or a room.

Size is only a stand-in for distance. A tiny object up close and a large
object farther away can cross the same 10 percent line. A busy background
creates extra contours, so the box can grab the wrong shape. An unusual angle
can fall under 0.60 and show "none", because the rule refuses a weak match.
YOLO-World, when present, only proposes boxes. A wrong YOLO box still has to
pass CLIP.


CLOSING
-------
Show a battery, then a wire, then an ordinary object.
OpenCV decides where to crop and whether the object is close enough.
CLIP's image tower and the four stored text vectors decide the name.
The first two light their symbols and leave one photo each.
The third lights Invalid and leaves the folders unchanged.
That is E-cycle: see the item, name it with a pretrained model, and keep a
record only when it is a battery or a wire.
